Ingredients
1 lb dry chickpeas/garbanzo beans - you must start with dry, do NOT
substitute canned, they will not work!
1 small onion, roughly chopped
1/4 cup chopped fresh parsley
3-5 cloves garlic (I prefer roasted garlic cloves)
1 1/2 tbsp flour or chickpea flour
1 3/4 tsp salt
2 tsp cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
1/4 tsp black pepper
1/4 tsp cayenne pepper
Pinch of ground cardamom
Vegetable oil for frying - grapeseed, sunflower, avocado, canola, and
peanut oils all work well

Directions:
Pour the chickpeas into a large bowl and cover them by about 3 inches of
cold water. Let them soak overnight. They will double in size as they
soak – you will have between 4 and 5 cups of beans after soaking.

Drain and rinse the garbanzo beans well. Pour them into your food
processor along with the chopped onion, garlic cloves, parsley, flour or
chickpea flour (use chickpea flour to make gluten free), salt, cumin,
ground coriander, black pepper, cayenne pepper, and cardamom. NOTE: if
you have a smaller food processor, you will want to divide the
ingredients in half and process the mixture one batch at a time.


Pulse all ingredients together until a rough, coarse meal forms. Scrape
the sides of the processor periodically and push the mixture down the
sides. Process till the mixture is somewhere between the texture of
couscous and a paste. You want the mixture to hold together, and a more
paste-like consistency will help with that... but don't overprocess, you
don't want it turning into hummus!

Once the mixture reaches the desired consistency, pour it out into a
bowl and use a fork to stir; this will make the texture more even
throughout. Remove any large chickpea chunks that the processor missed.

Cover the bowl with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 1-2 hours.

Note: Some people like to add baking soda to the mix to lighten up the
texture inside of the falafel balls. I don’t usually add it, since the
falafel is generally pretty fluffy on its own. If you would like to add
it, dissolve 2 tsp of baking soda in 1 tbsp of water and mix it into the
falafel mixture after it has been refrigerated.

Fill a skillet with vegetable oil to a depth of 1 ½ inches. I prefer to
use cooking oil with a high smoke point, like grapeseed. Heat the oil
slowly over medium heat. The ideal temperature to fry falafel is between
360 and 375 degrees F; the best way to monitor the temperature is to use
a deep fry or candy thermometer. After making these a few times, you
will start to get a feel for when the oil temperature is "right."

Meanwhile, form falafel mixture into round balls or slider-shaped
patties using wet hands or a falafel scoop. I usually use about 2 tbsp
of mixture per falafel. You can make them smaller or larger depending on
your personal preference. The balls will stick together loosely at
first, but will bind nicely once they begin to fry. 

If the balls won't hold together, place the mixture back in the
processor again and continue processing to make it more paste-like. Keep
in mind that the balls will be delicate at first; if you can get them
into the hot oil, they will bind together and stick. If they still won't
hold together, you can try adding 2-3 tbsp of flour or chickpea flour to
the mixture. If they still won't hold, add 1-2 eggs to the mix. This
should fix any issues you are having.

Before frying my first batch of falafel, I like to fry a test one in the
center of the pan. If the oil is at the right temperature, it will take
2-3 minutes per side to brown (5-6 minutes total). If it browns faster
than that, your oil is too hot and your falafels will not be fully
cooked in the center. Cool the oil down slightly and try again. 


When the oil is at the right temperature, fry the falafels in batches of
5-6 at a time till golden brown on both sides. 


Once the falafels are fried, remove them from the oil using a slotted
spoon.


Let them drain on paper towels. Serve the falafels fresh and hot; they
go best with a plate of hummus and topped with creamy tahini sauce. You
can also stuff them into a pita.


Troubleshooting: If your falafel is too hard/too crunchy on the outside,
there are two possible reasons-- 1) you didn't process the mixture
enough-- return the chickpea mixture to the processor to make it more
paste-like. 2) the chickpeas you used were old. Try buying a fresher
batch of dried chickpeas next time.

SESAME FALAFEL VARIATION: After forming the balls or patties, dip them
in sesame seeds prior to frying. This will make the falafel coating
crunchier and give it a slightly nutty flavor.


HERB FALAFEL VARIATION (GREEN FALAFEL): Add ½ cup additional chopped
green parsley, or cilantro, or a mixture of the two prior to blending.


TURMERIC FALAFEL (YELLOW FALAFEL): Add ¾ tsp turmeric to the food
processor prior to blending.


EGYPTIAN FAVA BEAN FALAFEL: Use 1 lb. dried fava beans instead of
chickpeas; cover them with cold water, soak them for at least 24 hours,
then drain, rinse and peel them. You can also use a mixture of soaked
fava beans and chickpeas if you wish; just make sure the weight of the
dried beans adds up to 1 lb.

After the beans are soaked and rinsed, add the Classic Falafel
ingredients to the processor along with the following ingredients – 1
leek, cleaned, trimmed, and quartered; ¼ cup chopped dill; ¼ cup chopped
cilantro; and an additional ¾ tsp cayenne pepper. When mixture is
processed to a coarse meal, pour into a bowl. Stir 2 ½ tbsp sesame seeds
into the mixture with a fork until it’s evenly dispersed throughout the
mixture. Refrigerate and proceed with frying. If mixture seems too “wet”
when making the falafel balls, add additional flour by the teaspoonful
until the mixture sticks together better. Continue with frying.

HOW TO MAKE A FALAFEL PITA: Making a falafel pita is actually really
simple. The two main ingredients are pita bread and falafel. 


Cut the pita bread in half to form two “pockets.” Each pocket is a
serving size. Stuff the pocket with falafel, as well as any add-ons you
fancy.

Here are some traditional add-ons that can be added to your pita; these
are the ingredients most widely available at falafel stands throughout
Israel: Tahini sauce, shredded lettuce, diced or sliced tomatoes,
Israeli salad, onions, dill pickles, hummus, tabouli, french fries

Here are some less traditional add-ons that are also tasty: sprouts,
cucumber slices, roasted peppers, roasted eggplant slices, sunflower
seeds, feta cheese, yogurt, tzatziki

Source: https://toriavey.com/toris-kitchen/falafel/

